Update the documentation to reflect our new release lifecyle (#9349)
silverstripe/silverstripe-framework: docs/en/05_Contributing/04_Release_Process.md

## Release Planning

The Silverstripe CMS core team uses an Agile methodology. We aim to keep the latest development branches of each 
module in a "potentially releasable" state. Releases are planned around an issue backlog according to our 
[roadmap](https://www.silverstripe.org/software/roadmap/).  We re-revaluate our priorities every few weeks.

Silverstripe CMS is split up into many modules listed on [github.com/silverstripe](https://github.com/silverstripe).

> Each of them will have its own milestones and issues, and different release lines (e.g. 1.x vs. 4.x).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each may have a different release line (e.g. 1.x vs. 4.x).
```

As per your comment above, referring to milestones on a module basis is less relevant now.

## Release Planning

> 

Author: We don't really use Milestones like that anymore. We use them them indirectly through ZenHub, but I don't think an community member would have any hope of figuring out what's going to be in the next minor release by looking at the milestone.

The Silverstripe CMS core team uses an Agile methodology. We aim to keep the latest development branches of each 
module in a "potentially releasable" state. Releases are planned around an issue backlog according to our 

> [roadmap](https://www.silverstripe.org/software/roadmap/). We operate in 2-week sprints and 

Reviewer 2: 2-week sprint is rather a part of our internal processes and may change without any warnings or obligations. I don't think we have to mention that in here. Also, if we change to kanban, we won't remember to patch this documentation, so I reckon we should avoid mentioning it here in the first place.

I also believe this might be rather confusing for community since they don't have any ways to see what's in sprints.

Author: This kind of fits with my side idea of publishing our change log every two weeks.

I included this part in here just so people would have a generic idea of how we decide our ongoing priorities. I don't think this commits us to always doing it that way ... the previous milestone bit has been wrong for several years as far as I can tell and I never heard any complaints.

We can make it more high level if you want. Maybe something like this.
> The Silverstripe CMS core team uses an Agile methodology. We aim to keep the latest development branches of each module in a "potentially releasable" state. Releases are planned around an issue backlog according to our [roadmap](https://www.silverstripe.org/software/roadmap/). We re-revaluate our priorities every few weeks.

## Release numbering {#release-numbering}

Silverstripe CMS follows [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org).

All Silverstripe CMS modules (including `silverstripe/framework`) may have patch releases created at any time, and will
not necessarily match other core module patch release numbers. For example, your project may be using
`silverstripe/cms` 4.3.1 with `silverstripe/versioned` 4.3.9.

All Silverstripe CMS recipes are released in lock step with each other. For example, `silverstripe/installer` 4.3.1 will
contain `silverstripe/recipe-cms` 4.3.1 and `silverstripe/recipe-core` 4.3.1. These recipes may contain various patch
versions of its modules within the same minor release line (4.3 in this example).

## Regular quarterly releases

> A regular Silverstripe CMS release is tagged every quarter. This usually involves creating a new minor increment of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A regular Silverstripe CMS release is tagged on a quarterly basis, in the months: March, June, September, December. This usually involves creating a new minor increment of 
```

each core recipe. Regular quarterly releases are preceded by pre-stable releases to help lay the groundwork for the
stable release.

### Beta phase

At the start of the Beta phase:
* new minor branches for core modules are forked from the major branches
* a feature freeze is instituted on the minor branches
* a `beta1` release is tagged for recipes and related modules.

> The beta phase lasts approximately one month. Additional betas may be released to address critical issues holding back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The length of the beta phase period will be communicated at the time it is tagged. While the beta phase lasts additional betas may be released to address critical issues holding back
```

testers.

#### "Beta release" definition

> The purpose of a beta release is to stabilise the Silverstripe CMS codebase for an upcoming stable release and showcase 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of a beta release is to initiate a "Feature Freeze" to stabilise the Silverstripe CMS codebase for an upcoming stable release and showcase 
```

## Release numbering {#release-numbering}

Silverstripe CMS follows [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org).

All Silverstripe CMS modules (including `silverstripe/framework`) may have patch releases created at any time, and will
not necessarily match other core module patch release numbers. For example, your project may be using
`silverstripe/cms` 4.3.1 with `silverstripe/versioned` 4.3.9.

All Silverstripe CMS recipes are released in lock step with each other. For example, `silverstripe/installer` 4.3.1 will
contain `silverstripe/recipe-cms` 4.3.1 and `silverstripe/recipe-core` 4.3.1. These recipes may contain various patch
versions of its modules within the same minor release line (4.3 in this example).

## Regular quarterly releases

> A regular Silverstripe CMS minor release is tagged every quarter. This involves creating a new minor increment of 

Reviewer 2: It doesn't have to be a `minor`. E.g. we have skept releasing a minor `4.5` in June and did a bunch of security patch releases instead (which was 4.4.4, 4.3.5, 4.2.5, 3.7.4 and 3.6.8).

Should we rephrase to mention that it's `usually a minor, but doesn't have to be`?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A regular Silverstripe CMS release is tagged every quarter. This usually involves creating a new minor increment of 
```

each core recipe. Regular quarterly releases are preceded by pre-stable releases to help lay the groundwork for the
stable release.

### Beta phase

At the start of the Beta phase:

> * new minor branches for core modules are forked from the default branches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* new minor branches for core modules are forked from the major branches
```

* a feature freeze is instituted on the minor branches

> * a `beta1` release is tagged for recipes and related modules.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* a `beta1` release is tagged for recipes and related modules
```

> The beta phase lasts approximately one month. Additional betas may be released to address critical issues holding back

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the beta phase lasts additional betas may be released to address found issues
```

We should avoid mentioning any timeframes in the documentation since that's a subject for change.

Author: I think the timeframe is kind of important here. If I'm telling you "I will tag an RC a month from now", that gives you a good indication of how much time you have to put your feedback in. If we don't specify a time frame it's not as clear.

It doesn't stop us from changing it again in a few release if we decide it's not practical.

Reviewer 2: we can give expected time frames when we announce releases. it doesn't have to be carved in stone. E.g. when we do a feature freeze we can mention in the announcement itself how much time we expect it to last until we do the RC

Reviewer: I agree with @dnsl48 here. I've made a different suggestion to outline that we will communicate timelines at the time of tagging the beta.

testers.

#### "Beta release" definition

The purpose of a beta release is to stabilise the Silverstripe CMS codebase for an upcoming stable release and showcase 
new features. A beta release is likely to contain regressions and new bugs. A beta release is primarily aimed at testers 

> who want to help identify bugs and regressions.

Reviewer 4: The RC phase section mentions releasing a public RC tag. Assuming you'll do this for betas too, do you want to list that here as well?

Author: The point of mentioning the public RC tag was to differentiate from the private RC we send to the auditors. I'm happy to change the point above to "a publicly visible `beta1` release is tagged for recipes and related modules" if we feel this is distinction is not clear.

#### "Feature freeze" definition

> A "Feature freeze" is an unreleased minor branch state. This state allows the core team to stabilise the upcoming 

Reviewer 4: Do you want to say "pre-release" or "unstable" instead of "unreleased" given that you will be releasing beta tags at the same time?

Author: Yeah, I struggled finding the exact word to use here.  "pre-release" might be better here.

Reviewer 2: +1. semver calls it "pre-release". Also `state -> version`, so may sound like "pre-release version"

Author: ```suggestion
A "Feature freeze" is a pre-release minor branch state. This state allows the core team to stabilise the upcoming 
```

> release and reach production-quality.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
release and reach production quality.
```

The following type of changes can be merged in a branch in feature freeze:
* bug fixes, regardless of severity
* API changes if they fix a bug and are compliant with our existing semver commitments

> * merge-ups from older minor branches.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* merge-ups from older minor branches (introducing bug fixes)
```

The following changes cannot be merged in a branch in feature freeze:

> * any PR that introduces new functionality

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* anything that introduces new features or enhancements
```

Reviewer 2: 1+.
However, I'd suggest to avoid mentioning "enhancements" as some may be performed without API changes

Author: ```suggestion
* anything that introduces new features
```

> * API changes not targeted to fixing a bug, or that alter an existing API in a stable release

Author: ```suggestion
* API changes not targeted to fixing a bug, or that alter an existing API in a stable release.
```

> * API changes not targeted to fixing a bug or that alters an existing API in a stable release.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* API changes not targeted to fixing a bug, or that alter an existing API in a stable release
```

### Release Candidate phase

All critical or high priority issues in the beta release should have been identified and fixed by the start of the
Release Candidate phase.

At the start of the Release Candidate phase:
* a publicly visible `rc1` release is tagged for recipes and related modules
* a private Release Candidate is created containing fixes for undisclosed vulnerabilities on top of the `rc1` release

> * the private Release Candidate is delivered to independent auditors for a security review.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* the private Release Candidate is delivered to independent auditors for a security review
```

> The Release Candidate phase lasts approximately two weeks. Additional patches may be added to the final release only if:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the Release Candidate phase lasts additional patches may be added to the final release if:
```

Timeframes are subject to change

Author: Same discussion point has the beta period.

Reviewer: I disagree with this suggestion. While the beta phase period can be communicated at the time of tagging, the release candidate period has specific dates that are unlikely to change due to our commitments with external auditors. 'Approximately two weeks' seems appropriate to me.

* vulnerabilities are discovered by the security audit

> * additional critical issues are identified. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* additional critical issues are identified
```

#### "Release Candidate" definition

A release candidate will not introduce any new features compared to its preceding beta release. The Silverstripe CMS
core team is confident a release candidate is production quality and does not introduce new regressions.

The purpose of a release candidate is to allow module maintainers and project owners to audit the upcoming release and
confidently plan their upgrades.

Only critical bug fixes can be added to the upcoming stable release once the release candidate is released.

### Stable phase

A new stable minor release is tagged for Silverstripe CMS core recipes. This marks the start of our official semver

> commitment for that minor release.

Reviewer 4: Not sure I like this sentence - we're always committed to semver, regardless of whether changes are released or not

Author: That's not quite the understanding I have.

If I add a new API in the 4.x branch of framework and next week we realise it doesn't quite work, I think we should be allowed to change that API. Otherwise, that would make our development process considerably less flexible.

Reviewer 2: Could we rephrase to `semver commitment for the API added in that minor release`

Reviewer 3: I understand both perspectives here:

- For Max, the commitment translates to "every _release_ we make conforms to semver"
- For Robbie, the commitment translates to "every _change_ we merge conforms to semver"

I'd argue the former is far more important than the latter. Developers consuming dev branches should be aware that the software can be unstable, and I think it's reasonable for that to extend to "new features may change in behaviour before we properly release them". Once we hit a stable release, though, those new features are being consumed by the masses, and it would be a very clear and harmful violation to change their APIs.

Ideally we'd always ship the exact right solution in the first PR we raise, or at least every required change to the solution would be ironed out during peer review, but I think it's worth providing some leeway (prior to release) to accommodate when that isn't the case - otherwise we may end up either shipping rough-edged APIs, or violating our own rules to avoid this.

Looking at the [Semver documentation](https://semver.org), it very clearly talks about release _versions_, not about individual commits. We should aim for any given commit to be 'releasable', but we're also aware that we don't release _every_ commit - if we did, that would make Robbie's level of commitment mandatory.

Reviewer 5: Would an accurate summary be:
We never look to break semver with merges, however sometimes accidents happen.
We commit to performing an audit and correcting any violations prior to a release.
The important part here is that we don't go breaking API's flippantly, and always consider impact before merging - but most especially before release.

Reviewer 3: I don't think it even needs that many words - to make the message clearer, we could adjust it to:

```suggestion
commitment for any new APIs introduced in that minor release.
```

Reviewer 4: I agree with what you said Garion.

We shouldn’t merge a PR that we know doesn’t conform to our semver expectations for the target branch (eg a feature into a patch branch) even if you expect to fix it before release time (you will probably forget). Of course if you wanted to do so you can do whatever you want in a pre release branch- you’re right that out semver commitment begins when we tag- so long as you correct your mistakes before it gets released.

A good example of an exception to this rule would be adding a new feature then refactoring it entirely before it gets tagged- while it’s a breaking change To the unstable dev branch, the end result isn’t.

Author: Sounds good. I'll commit @Cheddam suggested edit.

## Supported versions {#supported-versions}

At any point in time, the core development team will support a set of releases to varying levels:

> * The status of major releases is determined by the [roadmap](http://silverstripe.org/roadmap)

Author: This part just fixes the alignment of the markdown list

so we strive for giving ample warning on any upcoming changes through a "deprecation cycle".

How to deprecate an API:

* Add a `@deprecated` item to the docblock tag, with a `{@link <class>}` item pointing to the new API to use.
* Update the deprecated code to throw a [Deprecation::notice()](api:SilverStripe\Dev\Deprecation::notice()) error.
* Both the docblock and error message should contain the **target version** where the functionality is removed.
  So, if you're committing the change to a *3.1* minor release, the target version will be *4.0*. 
* Deprecations should not be committed to patch releases
* Deprecations should only be committed to pre-release branches, ideally before they enter the "beta" phase.
  If deprecations are introduced after this point, their target version needs to be increased by one.
* Make sure that the old deprecated function works by calling the new function - don't have duplicated code!
* The commit message should contain an `API` prefix (see ["commit message format"](code#commit-messages))
* Document the change in the [changelog](/changelogs) for the next release

> * Deprecated APIs can be removed only after developers have had sufficient time to react to the changes. Hence,     deprecated APIs should be removed in MAJOR releases only. Between MAJOR releases, leave the code in place with    a deprecation warning. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Deprecated APIs can be removed only after developers have had sufficient time to react to the changes. Hence, deprecated APIs should be removed in MAJOR releases only. Between MAJOR releases, leave the code in place with a deprecation warning. 
```

  So, if you're committing the change to a *3.1* minor release, the target version will be *4.0*. 
* Deprecations should not be committed to patch releases
* Deprecations should only be committed to pre-release branches, ideally before they enter the "beta" phase.
  If deprecations are introduced after this point, their target version needs to be increased by one.
* Make sure that the old deprecated function works by calling the new function - don't have duplicated code!
* The commit message should contain an `API` prefix (see ["commit message format"](code#commit-messages))
* Document the change in the [changelog](/changelogs) for the next release
* Deprecated APIs can be removed only after developers have had sufficient time to react to the changes. Hence,     deprecated APIs should be removed in MAJOR releases only. Between MAJOR releases, leave the code in place with    a deprecation warning. 
* Exceptions to the deprecation cycle are APIs that have been moved into their own module, and continue to work with the new minor release. These changes can be performed in a single minor release without a deprecation period.

> * Add a `warnings` entry to the module's `.upgrade.yml` file so the

Author: That's the only new entry i nthis list.

Reviewer 4: It'd be nice it we could automate the population of this file from `@deprecated` tags in PHPDoc (just commenting, not requesting anything here)

[Silverstripe Upgrader can flag deprecated APIs](/upgrading/upgrading_module#upgradeyml).  

> Here's an example for replacing `Director::isDev()` with a (theoret ical) `Env::is_dev()`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here's an example for replacing `Director::isDev()` with a (theoretical) `Env::is_dev()`:
```

[supported modules](https://www.silverstripe.org/software/addons/silverstripe-commercially-supported-module-list/),
we will take the following actions:

* Acknowledge to the reporter that we've received the report and that a fix is forthcoming.
  We'll give a rough timeline and ask the reporter to keep the issue confidential until we announce it.
* Assign a [CVE identifier](https://cve.mitre.org) to the issue.
* For "high" and "critical" issues (CVSS of >=7.0): Pre-announce the upcoming security release to a private pre-announcement mailing list of important stakeholders (see below).
* We will inform you about resolution and [announce](https://forum.silverstripe.org/c/releases) a 
[new release](http://silverstripe.org/security-releases/) publicly.

You can help us determine the problem and speed up responses by providing us with more information on how to reproduce
the issue: 
* Silverstripe CMS version (incl. any installed modules)
* PHP/webserver version and configuration
* anonymised webserver access logs (if a hack is suspected)

> * any other services and web packages running on the same server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* any other services and web packages running on the same server
```

and most likely before a patch has been developed.

Since we'll distribute sensitive information on unpatched vulnerabilities in this list, 
the selection criteria for joining naturally has to be strict. 
Applicants should provide references within the community, 
as well as a demonstrated need for this level of information 
(e.g. involvement with a large website with sensitive customer data). 
You don’t need to be a client of Silverstripe Ltd to get on board, 
but we will need to perform some low-touch background checks to verify your identity. 
Please contact [security@silverstripe.org](mailto:security@silverstripe.org) for details.

## Quality Assurance and Testing

The quality of our software is important to us, and we continuously test it for regressions
through a broad suite of unit and integration tests. Most of these run on 
[Travis CI](http://travis-ci.com), and results are publicly available.
Check the badges on the various modules available on [github.com/silverstripe](http://github.com/silverstripe).
There's also a [build matrix](https://www.silverstripe.org/software/addons/silverstripe-commercially-supported-module-list/)

> for our commercially supported modules (only showing build status for the default branch).

Author: Moved "02_Build_Tooling.md" ... see above.
